# Identifying Fraudulent Bank Account Applications

Environment Setup: 
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import os
import sys
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
import plotly.express as pexp
try:
    import pycaret
except:
    !pip install pycaret


Data Description: The Bank Account Fraud Dataset Suite consists of 6 separate datasets: base, variant 1, variant 2, variant 3, variant 4, and variant 5. All of the data was synthetically generated by a generative model (CTGAN) that was trained on real-world anonymized bank account opening fraud data. For this project we are utilizing the base dataset, which was sampled to best represent the original dataset. The base dataset contains 1 million observations and has 30 predictor variables. 

Dataset is available at: www.kaggle.com/datasets/sgpjesus/bank-account-fraud-dataset-neurips-2022/data 

Problem Statement: Identifying fraudulent bank account applications, such as ones based on stolen identities or with false information. This adversely impacts the victim’s (whose identity was stolen) ability to then later open bank accounts and obtain credit. 

Objective: To develop a model that identifes fradulent bank account applications. The metric we are using to evaluate our models is the F1 score since both false positives and false negatives are costly. A false positive would deny a person from opening a bank account when there is no fraudulent intention, while a false negative would approve opening a bank account for a person with fraudulent intention, therefore to balance out both of these concerns we are using the F1 score instead of just either recall or precision. 

Our models utilize the “fraud_bool” field as our response variable. It is an indicator variable, which is equal to 1 if the bank account opening application is fraudulent and equal to 0 if it is not fraudulent, thus a legitimate bank account application. 
